# Prayer

## Prayer in General

###### Q1. What does this Part of Christian Doctrine treat of?

*A.* This Part of Christian Doctrine treats of Prayer in general, and of the Our Father in particular.

###### Q2. What is prayer?

*A.* Prayer is an elevation of the mind to God to adore Him, to thank Him, and to ask Him for what we need.

###### Q3. How is prayer divided?

*A.* Prayer is divided into mental and vocal prayer. Mental prayer is that made with the mind alone; and vocal prayer is that expressed in words accompanied by attention of mind and devotion of heart.

###### Q4. Can prayer be divided in any other way?

*A.* Prayer may also be divided into private and public prayer.

###### Q5. What is private prayer?

*A.* Private prayer is that which each one says individually for himself or for others.

###### Q6. What is public prayer?

*A.* Public prayer is that said by the Sacred Ministers in the name of the Church and for the salvation of the faithful. That prayer also which is said in common and publicly by the faithful, in processions, pilgrimages and in God's house, may also be called public prayer.

###### Q7. Have we a well-founded hope of obtaining by means of prayer the helps and graces of which we stand in need?

*A.* The hope of obtaining from God the graces of which we stand in need is founded on the promises of the omnipotent, merciful and all-faithful God, and on the merits of Jesus Christ.

###### Q8. In whose name should we ask of God the graces we stand in need of?

*A.* We should ask of God the graces we stand in need of in the Name of Jesus Christ, as He Himself has taught us and as is done by the Church, which always ends her prayers with these words: Through our Lord Jesus Christ.

###### Q9. Why should we beg graces of God in the Name of Jesus Christ?

*A.* We should beg graces of God in the Name of Jesus Christ because He is our Mediator, and it is through Him alone that we can approach the throne of God.

###### Q10. If prayer is so powerful how is it that many times our prayers are not heard?

*A.* Many times our prayers are not heard, either because we ask things not conducive to our eternal salvation, or because we do not ask properly.

###### Q11. Which are the chief things we should ask of God?

*A.* The chief things we should ask of God are His own glory, our eternal salvation and the means of obtaining it.

###### Q12. Is it not also lawful to ask for temporal goods?

*A.* Yes, it is lawful to ask God for temporal goods, but always with the condition that these be in conformity with His Holy will and not a hindrance to our salvation.

###### Q13. If God knows all that is necessary for us, why should we pray?

*A.* Although God knows all that is necessary for us, He nevertheless wills that we should pray to Him so as to acknowledge Him as the Giver of every good gift, to attest our humble submission to Him, and to merit His favours for ourselves.

###### Q14. What is the first and best disposition to render our prayers efficacious?

*A.* The first and best disposition to render our prayers efficacious is to be in the state of grace; or if we are not in that state, to desire to put ourselves in it.

###### Q15. What other dispositions are required in order to pray well?

*A.* To pray well we specially require recollection, humility, confidence, perseverance and resignation.

###### Q16. What is meant by praying with recollection?

*A.* It means remembering that we are speaking to God; and hence we should pray with all respect and devotion, as far as possible avoiding distractions, that is, every thought foreign to our prayers.

###### Q17. Do distractions lessen the merit of prayer?

*A.* Yes, when we ourselves bring them about, or when we do not promptly drive them away; but if we do all we can to be recollected in God, then our distractions do not lessen the merit of our prayer, and may even increase it

###### Q18. What is required to pray with recollection?

*A.* Before prayer we should banish all occasions of distraction, and during prayer we should reflect that we are in the presence of God who sees and hears us.

###### Q19. What is meant by praying with humility?

*A.* It means sincerely acknowledging our own unworthiness, powerlessness and misery, and as well as this observing a respectful posture.

###### Q20. What is meant by praying with confidence?

*A.* It means that we should have a firm hope of being heard, if it is to God's glory and our own true welfare.

###### Q21. What is meant by praying with perseverance?

*A.* It means that we should not grow tired of praying, if God does not at once hear us, but that we should ever continue to pray with increased fervour.

###### Q22. What is meant by praying with resignation?

*A.* It means that we should conform our will to the will of God, even when our prayers are not heard, because He knows better than we do what is necessary for our eternal salvation.

###### Q23. Does God always hear prayers when well said?

*A.* Yes, God always hears prayers when well said; but in the way He knows to be most conducive to our eternal salvation, and not always in the way we wish.

###### Q24. What effects does prayer produce in us?

*A.* Prayer makes us recognise our dependence on God, the Supreme Lord, in all things; it makes us think on heavenly things; it makes us advance in virtue; it obtains for us God's mercy; it strengthens us against temptation; it comforts us in tribulation; it aids us in our needs; and it obtains for us the grace of final perseverance.

###### Q25. When should we especially pray?

*A.* We should especially pray when in danger, in temptation, and at the hour of death; moreover, we should pray often, and it is advisable we should do so morning and night, and when beginning the more important actions of the day.

###### Q26. For whom should we pray?

*A.* We should pray for all; first, for ourselves, then for our relatives, superiors, benefactors, friends and enemies; for the conversion of poor sinners, and of those outside the true Church, and for the Holy Souls in Purgatory.

## The Lord's Prayer

*The Lord's Prayer in General*

###### Q1. Which is the most excellent of all vocal prayers?

*A.* The most excellent of all vocal prayers is that which Jesus Christ taught us, that is to say, the Our Father.

###### Q2. Why is the Our Father the most excellent of all prayers?

*A.* The Our Father is the most excellent of all prayers because Jesus Christ Himself composed it and taught it to us; because it contains clearly and in a few words all we can hope for from God; and because it is the standard and model of all other prayers.

###### Q3. Is the Our Father also the most efficacious of prayers?

*A.* Yes, it is also the most efficacious of prayers, because it is the most acceptable to God, since in it we pray in the very words His Divine Son has taught us.

###### Q4. Why is the Our Father called the Lord's prayer?

*A.* The Our Father is called the Lord's Prayer, precisely because Jesus Christ our Lord has taught it to us with His own lips.

###### Q5. How many petitions are there in the Our Father?

*A.* In the Our Father there are seven petitions preceded by an introduction.

###### Q6. Say the Our Father.

*A.* (1) Our Father who art in Heaven: (2) Hallowed be Thy Name; (3) Thy kingdom come; (4) Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; (5) Give us this day our daily bread; (6) And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; (7) And lead us not into temptation; (8) But deliver us from evil. Amen.

###### Q7. When invoking God in the beginning of the Lord's Prayer, why do we call Him Our Father?

*A.* In the beginning of the Lord's Prayer we call God Our Father, to foster confidence in His infinite goodness by the remembrance that we are his children.

###### Q8. How can we say that we are the children of God?

*A.* We are the children of God: first, because He has created us in His own image, and preserves and governs us by His providence; and secondly, because by an Act of special benevolence He has adopted us in Baptism as brothers of Jesus Christ and co-heirs with Him to eternal glory.

###### Q9. Why do we call God Our Father and not my Father?

*A.* We call God Our Father and not my Father, because we are all His children, and hence we should look on and love one another as brothers and pray for one another.

###### Q10. God being in every place, why do we say: Who art in heaven?

*A.* God is in every place; but we say: Our Father who art in heaven, to raise our hearts to heaven, where God manifests His glory to His children.

## The First Petition

###### Q11. What do we ask in the First Petition when we say: Hallowed be Thy Name?

*A.* In the First Petition: Hallowed be Thy Name, we ask that God may be known, loved, honoured and served by the whole world and by ourselves in particular.

###### Q12. What do we intend when we ask that God may be known, loved, honoured and served by the whole world?

*A.* We intend to beg that infidels may come to the knowledge of the Lord God, that heretics may recognise their errors, that schismatics may return to the unity of the Church, that sinners may repent, and that the just may persevere in well-doing.

###### Q13. Why do we first of all ask that the Name of God may be sanctified?

*A.* We first of all ask that the Name of God may be sanctified, because the glory of God should be nearer our hearts than all other goods and interests.

###### Q14. How can we promote the glory of God?

*A.* We can promote the glory of God by prayer, by good example, and by directing to Him all our thoughts, affections and actions.

## The Second Petition

###### Q15. What do we mean by the Kingdom of God?

*A.* By the Kingdom of God we mean a threefold spiritual Kingdom; that is, the reign of God in us, or the reign of grace; the reign of God on earth, or the Holy Catholic Church; and the reign of God in heaven, or Paradise.

###### Q16. In the words: Thy Kingdom come, what do we ask with regard to grace?

*A.* With regard to grace we beg that God may reign in us by His sanctifying grace, by which He deigns to dwell within us as a king in his palace; and that He may keep us ever united to Himself by the virtues of faith, hope and charity, through which He reigns over our intellect, our heart and our will.

###### Q17. In the words: Thy Kingdom come, what do we ask regarding the Church?

*A.* Regarding the Church we ask that she may be spread and propagated ever more and more throughout the world for the salvation of mankind.

###### Q18. In the words: Thy Kingdom come, what do we ask regarding Heaven?

*A.* Regarding Heaven we beg to be one day admitted into that Paradise for which we were created and where we shall be perfectly happy.

## The Third Petition

###### Q19. What do we ask in the Third Petition: Thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven?

*A.* In the Third Petition: Thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven, we beg the grace to do the will of God in all things by obeying His Commandments as promptly as the Angels and Saints obey Him in Heaven; and we also beg the grace to correspond to divine inspirations and to live resigned to the will of God should He send us tribulations.

###### Q20. Is it necessary to do the will of God?

*A.* It is as necessary to do the will of God as it is to work out our salvation, because Jesus Christ has said that they alone who have done the will of His Father shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

###### Q21. In what way can we know the will of God?

*A.* We can know the will of God especially by means of the Church and of the spiritual superiors appointed by God to guide us along the way of salvation; we may also learn His most holy will from the divine inspirations that come to us and from the very surroundings in which the Lord has placed us.

###### Q22. Should we always recognise the will of God in adversity as well as in prosperity?

*A.* Both in prosperity and adversity we should always recognise the will of God, who directs or permits all things for our good.

## The Fourth Petition

###### Q23. What do we ask in the Fourth Petition: Give us this day our daily bread?

*A.* In the Fourth Petition we beg of God all that is daily necessary for soul and body.

###### Q24. What do we ask of God for our soul?

*A.* For our soul we ask of God the sustenance of our spiritual life, that is, we pray the Lord to give us His grace of which we stand in continual need.

###### Q25. How is the life of the soul nourished?

*A.* The life of the soul is nourished principally by the food of the word of God and by the Most Holy Sacrament of the Altar.

###### Q26. What do we ask of God for our body?

*A.* For the body we ask all that is necessary for the sustainment of our temporal life.

###### Q27. Why do we say: Give us this day our daily bread, rather than: Give us bread this day?

*A.* We say: Give us this day our daily bread, rather than: Give us bread this day, to exclude all desire of what is another's; and hence we beg the Lord to help us in acquiring just and lawful gains, so that we may procure our maintenance by our own toil And without theft or fraud.

###### Q28. Why do we say: Give us bread, and not: Give me bread?

*A.* We say: Give us, rather than, Give me, to remind us that as everything comes from God, so if He gives us His gifts in abundance, He does it in order that we may share what we do not need with the poor.

###### Q29. Why do we add: Daily?

*A.* We add, Daily, because we should desire that which is necessary to life, and not an abundance of food and other goods of the earth.

###### Q30. What more does Daily signify in the Fourth Petition?

*A.* The word Daily signifies that we should not be too solicitous regarding the future, but that we should simply ask what we need at present.

## The Fifth Petition

###### Q31. What do we ask in the Fifth Petition; And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us?

*A.* In the Fifth Petition: And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, we ask God to pardon us our sins as we pardon those who offend us.

###### Q32. Why are our sins called debts?

*A.* Our sins are called debts, because we must satisfy God's justice for them either in this life or in the next.

###### Q33. Can those who do not forgive their neighbour hope that God will pardon them?

*A.* Those who do not forgive their neighbour have no reason to hope that God will pardon them; especially since they condemn themselves when they ask God to forgive them as they forgive their neighbour.

## The Sixth Petition

###### Q34. What do we ask in the Sixth Petition: And lead us not into temptation?

*A.* In the Sixth Petition: And lead us not into temptation, we ask God to deliver us from temptation either by not allowing us to be tempted, or by giving us grace not to be conquered.

###### Q35. What are temptations?

*A.* Temptations are an incitement to sin that comes from the devil, or from the wicked, or from our own evil passions.

###### Q36. Is it a sin to have temptations?

*A.* No, it is no sin to have temptations; but it is a sin to consent to them, or voluntarily to expose oneself to the danger of consenting to them.

###### Q37. Why does God allow us to be tempted?

*A.* God allows us to be tempted so as to test our fidelity, increase our virtue, and augment our merits.

###### Q38. What should we do to avoid temptations?

*A.* To avoid temptation we should fly dangerous occasions, guard our senses, receive the sacraments frequently, and have recourse to the practice of prayer.

## The Seventh Petition

###### Q39. What do we ask in the Seventh Petition: But deliver us from evil?

*A.* In the Seventh Petition: But deliver us from evil, we ask God to free us from evils, past, present, and future, and particularly from the greatest of all evils which is sin, and from eternal damnation, which is its penalty.

###### Q40. Why do we say: Deliver us from evil and not: From evils?

*A.* We say: Deliver us from evil, and not, from evils, because we should not desire to be exempt from all the evils of this life, but only from those which are not good for our souls; and hence we beg liberation from evil in general, that is, from whatever God sees would be bad for us.

###### Q41. Is it not lawful to beg liberation from some evil in particular, for example, from sickness?

*A.* Yes, it is lawful to beg liberation from some evil in particular but always in bowing to the will of God, who may even ordain that particular affliction for the good of our soul.

###### Q42. How do the tribulations, which God sends us, help us?

*A.* Tribulations help us to do penance for our sins, to practise virtue, and above all to imitate Jesus Christ, our Head, to whom it is fitting we should conform ourselves in our sufferings, if we wish to have a share in His glory.

###### Q43. What is the meaning of Amen at the end of the Our Father?

*A.* Amen means: So be it; So I do desire; Thus do I pray the Lord; Thus do I hope.

###### Q44. To obtain the graces asked in the Our Father is it enough to recite it any way at all?

*A.* To obtain the graces asked in the Our Father we must recite it without haste and with attention; and we must put our heart into it.

###### Q45. When should we say the Our Father?

*A.* We should say the Our Father every day, because every day we have need of God's help.

## The Hail Mary

###### Q1. What prayer do we usually say after the Our Father?

*A.* After the Our Father we say the Angelic Salutation, that is, the Hail Mary, through which we have recourse to the Blessed Virgin.

###### Q2. Why is the Hail Mary called the Angelic Salutation?

*A.* The Hail Mary is called the Angelic Salutation, because it begins with the salutation addressed by the Archangel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary.

###### Q3. Whose are the words of the Hail Mary?

*A.* The words of the Hail Mary are partly the Archangel Gabriel's, partly St. Elizabeth's, and partly the Church's.

###### Q4. Which are the words of the Archangel Gabriel?

*A.* The words of the Archangel Gabriel are these: Hail, full of grace, The Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among women.

###### Q5. When was it that the angel said these words to Mary?

*A.* The angel said these words to Mary when he went to announce to her, on the part of God, the mystery of the Incarnation that was to be wrought in her.

###### Q6. What is our object in saluting the Blessed Virgin with the very words of the Archangel?

*A.* In saluting the Blessed Virgin with the words of the Archangel we congratulate her by recalling to mind the singular privileges and gifts which God has granted her in preference to all other creatures.

###### Q7. Which are the words of St. Elizabeth?

*A.* The words of St. Elizabeth are these: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

###### Q8. When was it that St. Elizabeth said these words?

*A.* St. Elizabeth, inspired by God, said these words when, three months before she gave birth to St. John the Baptist, she was visited by the Blessed Virgin, who then bore her Divine Son in her womb.

###### Q9. What do we intend by saying these words?

*A.* In saying the words of St. Elizabeth we congratulate the Blessed Virgin on her high dignity as Mother of God, and we bless God and thank Him for having given us Jesus Christ through Mary.

###### Q10. Whose are the other words of the Hail Mary?

*A.* All the other words of the Hail Mary have been added by the Church.

###### Q11. What do we ask in the last part of the Hail Mary?

*A.* In the last part of the Hail Mary we beg the protection of the Blessed Virgin during this life and especially at the hour of death, when we shall have greater need of it.

###### Q12. Why do we say the Hail Mary, rather than any other prayer, after the Our Father?

*A.* Because the Blessed Virgin is our most powerful advocate with Jesus Christ, and hence, after having said the prayer taught us by Jesus Christ, we pray the Blessed Virgin to obtain for us the graces we have asked therein.

###### Q13. Why is the Blessed Virgin so powerful?

*A.* The Blessed Virgin is so powerful, because, being the Mother of God, she cannot but be heard by Him.

###### Q14. What do the Saints teach us on devotion to Mary?

*A.* Regarding devotion to Mary the Saints teach us that those who are truly devout to her are loved and protected by her with a most tender Mother's love, and that with her help they are sure to find Jesus find and obtain Paradise

###### Q15. What form of devotion to Mary does the Church recommend in a very special manner?

*A.* The devotion to the Blessed Virgin which the Church specially recommends is the Holy Rosary.
