# On the Virtues and Vices

## The Main Virtues

### Theological Virtues

###### *Q.* 1 What is a supernatural virtue?

*A.* A supernatural virtue is a quality infused by God into the soul by which the latter acquires inclination, facility, and promptness to know good and do it towards eternal life. 

###### *Q.* 2 How many principal supernatural virtues are there?

*A.* The principal supernatural virtues are seven: three theological, and four cardinal virtues.

###### *Q.* 3 What are the theological virtues?

*A.* The theological virtues are: Faith, Hope and Charity.

###### *Q.* 4 Why are Faith, Hope and Charity called theological virtues?

*A.* Faith, Hope and Charity are called theological virtues, because they have God as their immediate and principal object, and are infused by Him.

###### *Q.* 5 How can the theological virtues have God for their immediate object?

*A.* The theological virtues have God for their immediate object, in this way that by Faith we believe in God, and believe all He has revealed; by Hope, we hope to possess God; and by Charity, we love God and in Him we love ourselves and our neighbour.

###### *Q.* 6 When does God infuse the theological virtues into the soul?

*A.* God in His goodness infuses the theological virtues into the soul when adorning us with His sanctifying grace; and hence when receiving Baptism we were enriched with these virtues and, along with them, with the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

###### *Q.* 7 Is it enough towards salvation, to have received the theological virtues in Baptism?

*A.* For one who has come to the use of reason, it is not enough to have received the theological virtues in Baptism; it is also necessary to make frequent acts of Faith, Hope and Charity.

###### *Q.* 8 When are we obliged to make acts of Faith, Hope and Charity?

*A.* We are obliged to make acts of Faith, Hope and Charity, when we come to the use of reason; often during life; and when in danger of death.

### On Faith

###### *Q.* 9 What is Faith?

*A.* Faith is a supernatural virtue, which God infuses into our souls, and by which, relying on the authority of God Himself, we believe everything which He has revealed and which through His Church He proposes for our belief.

###### *Q.* 10 How do we know the truths God has revealed?

*A.* We know the revealed truths by means of the Church, which is infallible; that is, by means of the Pope, the successor of St. Peter, and by means of the Bishops, the successors to the Apostles, who were taught by Jesus Christ Himself.

###### *Q.* 11 Are we certain of the truths the Church teaches us?

*A.* We are most certain of the truths the Church teaches, because Jesus Christ pledged His word that the Church should never be led into error.

###### *Q.* 12 By what sin is the Faith lost?

*A.* Faith is lost by denying or voluntarily doubting even a single article proposed for our belief.

###### *Q.* 13 How is lost Faith recovered

*A.* Lost Faith is recovered by repenting of the sin committed and by believing anew all that the Church believes.

### The Mysteries of Faith

###### *Q.* 14 Can we comprehend all the truths of Faith?

*A.* No, we cannot comprehend all the truths of Faith, because some of these truths are mysteries.

###### *Q.* 15 What are mysteries?

*A.* Mysteries are truths above reason and which we are to believe even though we cannot comprehend them.

###### *Q.* 16 Why must we believe mysteries?

*A.* We must believe mysteries because they are revealed to us by God, who, being infinite Truth and Goodness, can neither deceive nor be deceived.

###### *Q.* 17 Are mysteries contrary to reason?

*A.* Mysteries are above, not contrary to, reason; and even reason itself persuades us to accept the mysteries.

###### *Q.* 18 Why cannot the mysteries be contrary to reason?

*A.* The mysteries cannot be contrary to reason, because the same God who has given us the light of reason has also revealed the mysteries, and He cannot contradict Himself.

### On Holy Scripture

###### *Q.* 19 Where are the truths which God has revealed contained?

*A.* The truths which God has revealed are contained in Holy Scripture and in Tradition.

###### *Q.* 20 What is Holy Scripture?

*A.* Holy Scripture is the collection of books written under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, by the Prophets and the Hagiographers, the Apostles and the Evangelists. These books have been received by the Church as inspired.

###### *Q.* 21 How is Holy Scripture divided?

*A.* Holy Scripture is divided into two parts, the Old and the New Testament.

###### *Q.* 22 What is the Old Testament?

*A.* The Old Testament comprises the inspired books written before the coming of Jesus Christ.

###### *Q.* 23 What is the New Testament?

*A.* The New Testament comprises the inspired books written after the coming of Jesus Christ.

###### *Q.* 24 What is the common name for Holy Scripture?

*A.* The common name for Holy Scripture is the Holy Bible.

###### *Q.* 25 What is the meaning of the word Bible?

*A.* The word Bible means the collection of holy books, the Book par excellence, the book of books, the book inspired by God.

###### *Q.* 26 Why is Holy Scripture called the book "par excellence"?

*A.* Holy Scripture is so called because of the surpassing merit of the content as well as the author who inspired it.

###### *Q.* 27 Can there be any error in Holy Scripture?

*A.* There cannot be any error in Holy Scripture since indeed it is inspired by God. The Author of all of the books is God Himself. This does not prevent that in copies and translations that have been made, some errors on the part of the copyists or translators may have crept into it.

###### *Q.* 28 Is the reading of the Bible necessary to all Christians?

*A.* The reading of the Bible is not necessary to all Christians since they are instructed by the Church; however its reading is very useful and recommended to all.

###### *Q.* 29 May any translation of the Bible, in the vernacular, be read?

*A.* We can read those translations of the Bible in the vernacular which have been acknowledged as faithful by the Catholic Church and which have explanations also approved by the Church.

###### *Q.* 30 Why may we only read translations of the Bible approved by the Church?

*A.* We may only read translations of the Bible approved by the Church because she alone is the lawful guardian of the Bible.

###### *Q.* 31 Through which means can we know the true meaning of the Holy Scripture?

*A.* We can only know the true meaning of Holy Scripture through the Church's interpretation, because she alone is secure against error in that interpretation.

###### *Q.* 32 What should a Christian do who has been given a Bible by a Protestant or by an agent of the Protestants?

*A.* A Christian to whom a Bible has been offered by a Protestant or an agent of the Protestants should reject it with disgust, because it is forbidden by the Church. If it was accepted by inadvertence, it must be burnt as soon as possible or handed in to the Parish Priest.

###### *Q.* 33 Why does the Church forbid Protestant Bibles?

*A.* The Church forbids Protestant Bibles because, either they have been altered and contain errors, or not having her approbation and footnotes explaining the obscure meanings, they may be harmful to the Faith. It is for that same reason that the Church even forbids translations of the Holy Scriptures already approved by her which have been reprinted without the footnotes approved by her.

### On Tradition.

###### *Q.* 34 What is meant by Tradition?

*A.* Tradition is the non-written word of God, which has been transmitted by word of mouth by Jesus Christ and by the apostles, and which has come down to us through the centuries by the means of the Church, without being altered.

###### *Q.* 35 Where are the teachings of Tradition kept?

*A.* The teachings of Tradition are kept chiefly in the Councils' decrees, the writings of the Holy Fathers, the Acts of the Holy See and the words and practices of the sacred Liturgy.

###### *Q.* 36 What importance must we attach to Tradition?

*A.* We must attach to Tradition the same importance as the revealed word of God which Holy Scripture contains.

### On Hope

###### *Q.* 37 What is Hope?

*A.* Hope is a supernatural virtue, infused by God into the soul, by which we desire and expect that eternal life that God has promised to His servants, as well as the means necessary to attain it.

###### *Q.* 38 What grounds have we to hope that God will give us Heaven and the means necessary to secure it?

*A.* We hope that God will give us Heaven and the necessary means to attain it, because the all-merciful God, through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, has promised it to those who faithfully serve Him; and, being both faithful and omnipotent, He never fails in His promises.

###### *Q.* 39 What are the conditions necessary to obtain Heaven?

*A.* The conditions necessary to obtain Heaven are the grace of God, the practice of good works, and perseverance until death in His holy love.

###### *Q.* 40 How is Hope lost?

*A.* Hope is lost as often as Faith is lost; and it is also lost by the sins of despair and presumption.

###### *Q.* 41 How is lost Hope regained?

*A.* Lost Hope is regained by repenting of the sin committed, and by exciting anew confidence in the divine goodness.

### On Charity

###### *Q.* 42 What is Charity?

*A.* Charity is a supernatural virtue, infused into our soul by God, by which we love God above all for His own sake, and our neighbour as ourselves for the love of God.

###### *Q.* 43 Why should we love God?

*A.* We should love God because He is the Supreme Good, infinitely good and perfect; and also, because He commands us to do so, and because of the many benefits we receive from Him.

###### *Q.* 44 How are we to love God?

*A.* We are to love God above all things else, with our whole heart, with our whole mind, with our whole soul, and with all our strength.

###### *Q.* 45 What is meant by loving God above all other things?

*A.* To love God above all other things means to prefer Him to all creatures, even the dearest and most perfect, and to be willing to lose everything rather than offend Him or cease to love Him.

###### *Q.* 46 What is meant by loving God with our whole heart?

*A.* To love God with our whole heart means consecrating all our affections to Him.

###### *Q.* 47 What is meant by loving God with our whole mind?

*A.* To love God with our whole mind means directing all our thoughts to Him.

###### *Q.* 48 What is meant by loving God with our whole soul?

*A.* To love God with our whole soul means consecrating to Him the use of all the powers of our soul.

###### *Q.* 49 What is meant by loving God with all our strength?

*A.* To love God with all our strength means striving to grow ever more and more in His love, and so to act that all our actions should have as their one motive and end the love of Him and the desire of pleasing Him.

###### *Q.* 50 Why should we love our neighbour?

*A.* We should love our neighbour for the love of God, because God commands it, and because every man is made to God's image.

###### *Q.* 51 Are we obliged to love even our enemies?

*A.* We are obliged to love even our enemies, because they are our neighbours also and because Jesus Christ has made this love the object of an express command.

###### *Q.* 52 What is meant by loving our neighbour as ourselves?

*A.* To love our neighbour as ourselves means to wish him and do him, as far as possible, the good which we ought to wish for ourselves, and not to wish or to do him any evil.

###### *Q.* 53 When do we love ourselves as we ought?

*A.* We love ourselves as we ought when we endeavour to serve God and to place all our happiness in Him.

###### *Q.* 54 How is charity lost?

*A.* Charity is lost by each and every mortal sin.

###### *Q.* 55 How is charity regained?

*A.* Charity is regained by making acts of the love of God, by duly repenting and making a good confession.

### On The Cardinal Virtues

###### *Q.* 56 Name the Cardinal Virtues.

*A.* The Cardinal Virtues are Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance.

###### *Q.* 57 Why are Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance called Cardinal virtues?

*A.* Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance are called cardinal virtues because all the moral virtues are founded and hinged around them. (in Latin, cardo means hinge)

###### *Q.* 58 What is Prudence?

*A.* Prudence is the virtue that directs each action towards its lawful end and consequently seeks the proper means in order that the action be well accomplished in all points of view and thereby pleasing to Our Lord.

###### *Q.* 59 What is Justice?

*A.* Justice is the virtue which disposes us to give everyone what belongs to him.

###### *Q.* 60 What is Fortitude?

*A.* Fortitude is the virtue which renders us courageous to the point of not fearing danger, not even death, for the service of God.

###### *Q.* 61 What is temperance?

*A.* Temperance disposes us to control the inordinate desires that please the senses and makes us use temporal goods with moderation.

## The Gifts of the Holy Ghost

###### *Q.* 1 Name the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost.

*A.* The seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are, Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety and the Fear of the Lord.

###### *Q.* 2 What purpose do these gifts serve?

*A.* The gifts of the Holy Ghost serve to establish us in Faith, Hope and Charity, and to render us prompt in the exercise of those acts of virtue necessary towards attaining the perfection of a Christian life.

###### *Q.* 3 What is Wisdom?

*A.* Wisdom is a gift by which the mind is lifted up from earthly and transitory things, enabling us to contemplate things eternal, that is to say, God Himself, the eternal truth, and to relish and love Him, in which consists all our good.

###### *Q.* 4 What is Understanding?

*A.* Understanding is a gift which facilitates, as far as this is possible to mortal man, the understanding of the truths of faith and of the mysteries of God, which we are unable to know by the natural light of the intellect.

###### *Q.* 5 What is Counsel?

*A.* Counsel is a gift by which, amidst the doubts and uncertainties of human life, we are enabled to recognise those things that redound more to God's glory, to our own salvation, and to that of our neighbour.

###### *Q.* 6 What is Fortitude?

*A.* Fortitude is a gift which inspires us with valour and courage to observe faithfully the holy law of God and of the Church, by conquering all obstacles and all the assaults of our enemies.

###### *Q.* 7 What is Knowledge?

*A.* Knowledge is a gift enabling us to estimate created things at their proper worth, and to learn how to use them rightly and to direct them to our last end, which is God.

###### *Q.* 8 What is Piety?

*A.* Piety is a gift enabling us to venerate and love God and His Saints, and to preserve a pious and benevolent mind towards our neighbour for the love of God.

###### *Q.* 9 What is the Fear of the Lord?

*A.* The Fear of the Lord is a gift which makes us respect God and fear to offend His Divine Majesty, and which detaches us from evil while inciting us to good.

## The Beatitudes

###### *Q.* 1 Name the Beatitudes?

*A.* The Beatitudes are eight: (1) Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. (2) Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land. (3) Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. (4) Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be filled. (5) Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. (6) Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. (7) Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God. (8)Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

###### *Q.* 2 Why did Jesus Christ propose the Beatitudes to us?

*A.* Jesus Christ proposed the Beatitudes to us to make us detest the maxims of the world, and to invite us to love and practise the maxims of the gospel.

###### *Q.* 3 Who are they whom the world calls happy?

*A.* The world calls those happy who abound in riches and honours, who lead a pleasant life, and who meet with no occasions of suffering.

###### *Q.* 4 Who are the poor in spirit whom Jesus Christ calls blessed?

*A.* The poor in spirit are, according to the gospel, those whose hearts are detached from riches; who make good use of riches should they have any; who do not seek them too eagerly, if they have none; and who suffer the loss of such things with resignation when deprived of them.

###### *Q.* 5 Who are the meek?

*A.* The meek are those who act tenderly towards their neighbour, bear patiently with his defects, and accept the offences and injuries they receive from him without contention, resentment, or vengeance.

###### *Q.* 6 Who are they that mourn, yet are called happy?

*A.* They that mourn, yet are called happy, are they who suffer tribulations with resignation, and who mourn over sins committed, over the evils and scandals that prevail in the world, over Paradise because it is so distant, and over the danger there is of losing it.

###### *Q.* 7 Who are they that hunger and thirst after justice?

*A.* They that hunger and thirst after justice, are those who ardently desire to increase daily more and more in divine grace and in the exercise of good and virtuous works.

###### *Q.* 8 Who are the merciful?

*A.* The merciful are those who love their neighbour in God and for God's sake, compassionate his miseries, spiritual as well as corporal, and endeavour to succour him according to their means and position.

###### *Q.* 9 Who are the clean of heart?

*A.* The clean of heart are those who retain no affection for sin aqnd keep aloof from it, and who above all else avoid every sort of impurity.

###### *Q.* 10 Who are the peace-makers?

*A.* The peace-makers are those who preserve peace with their neighbour and with themselves, and who endeavour to bring about peace and concord between those who are at variance.

###### *Q.* 11 Who are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake?

*A.* They who suffer persecution for justice' sake are those who patiently bear derision, reproof, and persecution for the sake of the faith and of the law of Jesus Christ.

###### *Q.* 12 What do the various rewards promised by Jesus Christ in the Beatitudes denote?

*A.* The various rewards promised by Jesus Christ in the Beatitudes all denote under different names the eternal glory of Paradise.

###### *Q.* 13 Do the Beatitudes procure us the glory of Paradise alone?

*A.* The Beatitudes not only procure us the glory of Paradise, but are also the means of leading a happy life, as far as this is possible here on earth.

###### *Q.* 14 Do those who follow the path of the Beatitutdes receive any reward in this life?

*A.* Yes, certainly; those who follow the path of the Beatitudes do receive a reward even in this life, inasmuch as they enjoy interior peace and contentment, which is the beginning, even though an imperfect one, of the happiness of heaven.

###### *Q.* 15 Can those who follow the maxims of the world be called truly happy?

*A.* No, because they have no true peace of soul, and are in danger of being lost eternally.

The Main Kinds of Sins

###### *Q.* 1 How many kinds of sin are there?

*A.* There are two kinds of sin: original sin and actual sin.

###### *Q.* 2 What is original sin?

*A.* Original sin is the sin in which we are all born, and which we contracted by the disobedience of our first parent, Adam.

###### *Q.* 3 What evil effects has the sin of Adam brought upon us?

*A.* The evil effects of the sin of Adam are: The privation of grace, the loss of Paradise, together with ignorance, inclination to evil, death, and all our other miseries.

###### *Q.* 4 How is original sin cancelled?

*A.* Original sin is cancelled by holy Baptism.

###### *Q.* 5 What is actual sin?

*A.* Actual sin is that which man, after coming to the use of reason, commits of his own free will.

###### *Q.* 6 How many kinds of actual sin are there?

*A.* There are two kinds of actual sin: mortal and venial.

###### *Q.* 7 What is mortal sin?

*A.* Mortal sin is a transgression of the divine Law by which we seriously fail in our duties towards God, towards our neighbour, or towards ourselves.

###### *Q.* 8 Why is it called mortal?

*A.* It is called mortal because it brings death on the soul by making it lose sanctifying grace which is the life of the soul, just as the soul itself is the life of the body.

###### *Q.* 9 What injury does mortal sin do the soul? 

*A.* (1) Mortal sin deprives the soul of grace and of the friendship of God; (2) It makes it lose Heaven; (3) It deprives it of merits already acquired, and renders it incapable of acquiring new merits; (4) It makes it the slave of the devil; (5) It makes it deserve hell as well as the chastisements of this life.

###### *Q.* 10 Besides grave matter, what is required to constitute a mortal sin?

*A.* To constitute a mortal sin, besides grave matter there is also required full consciousness of the gravity of the matter, along with the deliberate will to commit the sin.

###### *Q.* 11 What is venial sin?

*A.* Venial sin is a lesser transgression of the divine Law, by which we slightly fail in some duty towards God, towards our neighbour, or towards ourselves.

###### *Q.* 12 Why is it called venial?

*A.* It is called venial Because it is light compared with mortal sin; because it does not deprive us of divine grace; and because God more readily pardons us.

###### *Q.* 13 Then little account need be made of venial sin?

*A.* That would be a very great mistake, not only because venial sin is always an offence against God; but also because it does no little harm to the soul.

###### *Q.* 14 What harm does venial sin do the soul?

*A.* Venial sin: (1) Weakens and chills charity in us; (2) Disposes us to mortal sin; (3) Renders us deserving of great temporal punishments both in this world and in the next.

## The Vices and other Very Grievous Sins

###### *Q.* 1 What is a vice?

*A.* A vice is an evil disposition of the mind to shirk good and do evil, arising from the frequent repetition of evil acts.

###### *Q.* 2 What difference is there between a sin and a vice?

*A.* Between sin and vice there is this difference that sin is a passing act, whereas vice is a bad habit, contracted by continually falling into some sin.

###### *Q.* 3 Which are the vices called capital?

*A.* The vices called capital are seven: Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger, Gluttony, Envy and Sloth.

###### *Q.* 4 How are the capital vices conquered?

*A.* The capital vices are conquered by the exercise of the opposite virtues: Thus Pride is conquered by humility; Covetousness by liberality; Lust by chastity; Anger by patience; Gluttony by abstinence; Envy by brotherly love; Sloth by diligence and fervour in the service of God.

###### *Q.* 5 Why are these vices called capital?

*A.* They are called capital because they are the head and fount of many other vices and sins.

###### *Q.* 6 How many are the sins against the Holy Ghost?

*A.* The sins against the Holy Ghost are six: (1) Despairing of being saved; (2) Presuming on being saved without merit; (3) Opposing the known truth; (4) Envying another's graces; (5) Obstinately remaining in sin; (6) Final impenitence.

###### *Q.* 7 Why are these sins specially said to be against the Holy Ghost?

*A.* These sins are specially said to be against the Holy Ghost, because they are committed through pure malice, which is contrary to goodness, the special attribute of the Holy Ghost.

###### *Q.* 8 Which are the sins that are said to cry to God for vengeance?

*A.* The sins that are said to cry to God for vengeance are these four: (1) Willful murder; (2) The sin of sodomy; (3) Oppression of the poor; (4) Defrauding labourers of their wages.

###### *Q.* 9 Why are these sins said to cry to God for vengeance?

*A.* These sins are said to cry to God for vengeance because the Holy Ghost says so, and because their iniquity is so great and so manifest that it provokes God to punish them with the severest chastisements.

***END OF*** CATECHISM OF PIUS X
